That Isn’t Science!
===================

October 18, 2006

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/psuedoscientism)

* * * * *

Larry Wall once noted that the scientificness of a field is inversely
correlated to how much the word “science” appears in its name. Physics,
of course, doesn’t have science in the name and is the most scientific
of all sciences. Then comes biology and and ethology and so on. Then
come the non-sciences like Computer Science and Poultry Science. And
worst of all is Scientology.

In general, whenever someone tells you that “science” has decreed that
you should do one thing or another that doesn’t seem reasonable, it’s
probably because they’re trying to pull one over on you, whether it’s
the “scientific” medicines you see on late-night TV or the science of
the behaviorists who say you shouldn’t love your kids.

But nowhere is this more evident than when people try to tell you what
science itself is. This field of meta-science seems to attract more
charlatans and malintents than any other. If you control how the very
notion of what’s scientific is defined — well, then that’s real power.
Even if the very idea is patently absurd. (A real scientist would never
tell you that doing X isn’t really science; their goal is to get the
truth, not sit around making rules about who’s in and who’s out.)

For much of the outside world, the test for a real science is
“falsifiability” — the possibility that there could be evidence proving
the claim wrong. This notion was invented by Karl Popper, who was
himself [an enemy of
science](http://www.geocities.com/Krishna_kunchith/dcs/popper/popper.html)
who tried to insist that science never actually made any progress, that
we never learned anything more about the world.

But even if we put aside this noxious pedigree, Popper’s definition is
still absurd. Take the distinction between astronomy and astrology. We
would all agree, I think, that the first is a science but the second
isn’t. But both of their predictions are equally falsifiable — astrology
makes a dozen falsifiable predictions in the newspaper five times a
week. Popper’s criteria isn’t of much help to us, even on such a basic
case.

Sadly, like many American intellectuals, the Supreme Court assumed that
falsifiability was a standard scientific test. In the *Daubert* case it,
[as Chris Mooney summarizes the view of the *American Journal of Public
Health*](http://www.prospect.org/web/page.ww?section=root&name=ViewWeb&articleId=10061),
“blundered miserably” and set judges the task of using this “deeply
confused philosophy of science” to act as gatekeepers in keeping
scientific claims from juries. Actual scientists like
[DefendingScience.org](http://defendingscience.org/) are working to undo
these mistakes, but you wouldn’t know it from the rhetoric — after
all, *Daubert*’s defenders claim they're just trying to uphold sound
scientific standards. (Chris Mooney’s book *The Republican War on
Science*, among others, has a fascinating exposé of the junk
science/sound science notions cooked up by the PR industry to trash
actual science. But that’s another subject.)

What are the real effects, though? Daubert was a parent whose child was
born with birth defects they believed were caused by the drug Benedictin
which, in animal studies, appeared to cause the defects they were
suffering. By making it harder for science to be presented in Court,
these kinds of rulings make it easier for drug companies to claim
there’s no “sound science” that they’re hurting anyone.

America isn’t alone, however. In Britain a group supporting what they
call “evidence-based medicine” is trying to tighten restrictions on what
experiments can be examined when approving drugs. Evidence-based
medicine? Who could be against that! But again, they’re playing the same
games. Behind evidence-based science are a bunch of very bizarre claims
about what science is and isn’t, taken not from doctors or scientists,
but from econometricians (the subspecialty of economics that has to do
with calculating things), which have quite a few problems of their own
when it comes to the subject of evidence.

Under “evidence-based medicine” rules, doctors aren’t allowed to
prescribe drugs on the basis of case studies and other reports; instead,
the only real evidence are large double-blind random controlled trials
whose results have a less than 5% probability of being due to chance.
(Why 5%? No good reason. But according to the EBM people anything more
than that isn’t evidence.)

Again, you have the same negative effects: when someone tries to claim
in court that a certain drug destroyed their life, the drug company can
claim that there’s no “evidence” to support this if the studies just
happen to be 94% likely instead of 95%, or if there’s only a series of
case studies instead of a controlled trial.

This isn’t evidence, this isn’t rationality, this isn’t science. Science
is about trying to get the truth about the world, using whatever
mechanisms are most effective at the job, whether you’re studying the
nature of planets in space or the nature of other cultures. When someone
tells you otherwise, tries to insist that technique X or subject Y
doesn’t deserve the name science, it’s probably because they’re trying
to pull a fast one on you.
